Tim Bray in [Software in 2014](https://www.tbray.org/ongoing/When/201x/2014/01/01/Software-in-2014) makes many statements about the software in 2013 and concludes with a sad prediction of the sorry state of client-side software for 2014.

He starts with the bottom-line of his observations:
__We’re at an inflection point in the practice of constructing software. Our tools are good, our server developers are happy, but when it comes to building client-side software, we really don’t know where we’re going or how to get there.__

I agree with the last part. While programming languages and MVC frameworks are good, server-side data processing and deployment tools are not good enough, our server developers are not happy. When it comes to client-side software we need to recognize the sad reality Tim describes because as he puts it we may be "stuck with clients-in-triplicate [Web/iOS/Android] for the long haul."


# Server Side
In describing the server-side software Tim highlights happy things while glancing over areas in technology that are still hard. The result is an unbalanced picture.

HTTP. More choices of languages, with better usability when it comes to concurrency. More choices of storage technology. These are sure good things, but unfortunately requirements on server-side developers increase more rapidly than the progress of their tools.

It is still way too hard to build distributed systems. One can argue it gets harder to build them, not easier. Web-scale distributed system use to be a niche thing, so it was less of an isse. More and more systems can now be described as Big Data Distributed Systems. There are many factors for why that is so. Such systems became some of the [most important technologies in 2014](http://weblog.smirnov.ca/tech/2013/12/30/2014-technologies-to-watch.html).

Need to process data? Learn how to deploy and use Hadoop. Can't wait for hours for Hadoop jobs to complete? Learn realtime processing system like Storm. Need to update your system? Develop the deployment process. Need to keep your system available at scale? Learn about ZooKeeper and HA strategies. PaaS helps, but it still not accepted as a method to deploy distributed systems. Server-side developers spend huge portion of their time and energy on scafolding and technologies unrelated to the problem they are trying to solve. It gets harder for small inexperienced teams to compete with expensive teams at big companies.

The net of it, building distributed systems is hard, but [things will improve in 2014](http://weblog.smirnov.ca/tech/2013/12/30/Big-Data-Distributed-Systems--2014-predictions.html).

# Client Side

While things are hard-but-improving on the server-side, there is no debate on Tim's core argument on the client-side.

What if we are indeed stuck in a word where client-side means three platforms: Web, iOS and Androind? (Plus Windows if you're still in the PC era.) How should developers respond?

Perhaps the best approach is to minimize what happens in client-side software? And if you can't avoid it, consider writing as little as possible of it, making client-side only about UI.

While we're living in this client-side mess, the quality, availability and performance of the network connection keeps increasing. Perhaps the best course of action is to make cient-side software as small as possible, and move as much as possible to the server?
